---
title: Acknowledgements
---

Within the collaborative realm of digital history, this project is about as close as you can get to a single-author work. Nevertheless, the long list of people who have contributed to it shows how reliant I have been on colleagues, friends, and the infrastructure of libraries and research universities.

In the first instance, the National Endowment for the Humanities and the Library of Congress created the _Chronicling America_ Data Challenge, which provided the impetus for creating this project. Thanks to Leah Weinryb-Grohsgal for creating the competition, and thanks to the NEH for inviting me to speak to the National Digital Newspaper Program's annual meeting in 2016 about this project. Over and above the amazing collection they have created, the _Chronicling America_ team at the Library of Congress has been very generous in guiding my access to their corpus. Nathan Yarasavage in particular answered many questions and arranged special access for downloading the bulk data. At George Mason University, George Oberle arranged for rights to the bulk data for Gale's Nineteenth-century Newspapers, which are used by permission, and he has always generously supported my research as both a librarian and a colleague. 
Much of the computation for this project happened on a virtual cluster provided by the Office of Research Computing at George Mason University. In particular, Jayshree Sarma and Dmitri Chebotarov provided invaluable assistance and access to computing resources. (This project was supported by resources provided by the [Office of Research Computing](https://orc.gmu.edu/) at George Mason University and funded in part by grants from the National Science Foundation [awards number 1625039 and 2018631].) Tyrus Berry discussed the machine-learning methods with me, helping me gain confidence that my idea for finding quotations could work. Jenny Bryan pointed me to statistical tests for runs. Much later, the Library of Congress Labs invited me to be a researcher on their Computing Cultural Heritage in the Cloud project, building on my work this project. Thanks to Olivia Dorsey, Meghan Ferriter, Alice Goldfarb, and Jaime Mears for making that time possible. While no historical research is possible without libraries and archives, computational historical research like this is especially indebted to the infrastructure of library and archives made freely available as a public good.

At Stanford University Press, Friederike Sundaraam was more patient than I could possibly have hoped about the length of time it took to complete this project. I am grateful for the her faith in the project and the willingness of the press to wait for it during the time it took me to get it right, even as they faced their own pressures to get a digital publishing program off the ground. I appreciate the genuinely useful comments from the anonymous peer reviewers provided during both rounds of peer review. Thanks to Jasmine Mulliken for seeing the project through the production process.

While this project was in development, many scholars at other institutions were kind enough to offer their expertise and often to invite me to speak about the project. Mark Noll's 2016 conference paper on "Presidential Death and the Bible: 1799, 1865, 1881" at the American Society of Church History served as the inspiration for this project. Mark was kind enough to then invite me to be a panelist for "The Bible in American History" at the John W. Kluge Center of the Library of Congress. Louis Epstein at St. Olaf's College, Lauren Tilton and Taylor Arnold at the University of Richmond, and Mickey Casad at Vanderbilt University's Center for Digital Humanities invited me to give talks or join colloquia at their institutions, while Chad Gaffield and Ian Milligan invited me to a workshop on "Quantitative Analysis and the Digital Turn in Historical Studies" at the Fields Institute for Mathematical Studies. At Vanderbilt, Jimmy Byrd has been a generous supporter of the project, and a key user of it for his excellent book, _A Holy Baptism of Fire and Blood_. Likewise Chris Gehrz has made frequent use of the project to write insightful verse histories for his blog posts at _The Anxious Bench_, which were encouraging to me as a sign that other people found value in using the project for their research.

I am sure there is no more congenial place to do digital history research than the Department of History and Art History at George Mason University. My colleagues never once batted an eye about this weird, strange project being scholarship, including two excellent chairs, Brian Platt and Matt Karush. On the contrary, my colleagues were universally supportive of the project. Stephen Robertson in particular has been a wonderful conversation partner about the form of digital scholarship. John Turner is my collaborator on all things American religion, and a truly generous, supportive friend. Kellen Funk at Columbia Law School has been my collaborator in all things related to text analysis and history, even if he would have preferred I spend more time on legal history with him.

As an institution, the demands of collaborative research and administration at RRCHNM frequently competed against spending time on this project, but as a group of people, my colleagues at RRCHNM were always supportive of my working on the project, including Mills Kelly, Jessica Otis, Amanda Madden, and Jason Heppler. I am grateful for the comments of RRCHNM's data working group in particular. Bridget Bukovich graciously agreed to help with the publicization of the project.

I am grateful for the research assistance of Liv Vermane in summer 2020 and Caitie McGeever in summer 2021. Caitie in particular created many of the items in the quotation gallery and wrote her own verse history. All of Caitie and Liv's written contributions appear under their by-line on this site. A leave from my department in spring 2022 enabled me to finish this project.

Thanks to Abby, Maggie, and Paul for their love. This project owes its origin to my dad. One day when I was a teenager he home from the bookstore _The Age of Federalism_ and _Sams Teach Yourself Java in 21 Days_, supporting all of my interests no matter how disparate or disant from his own. I doubt that this project is what he was expecting would result some two decades later, but whatever I have done in life is because of the love and support my parents gave me.
