---
title: Losing the soul to greed
description: 'A text at the intersection of American capitalism and American Christianity.'
reference: 'Matthew 16:26'
snippet: 'For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?'
order: 3
draft: false
author: Caitlin McGeever
---

When considering the cost of a soul, a contributor to the *Rocky Ford
Enterprise* in 1896 portended that "The man who is not willing to be
good is the enemy to God, no matter how near the pulpit he sits in
church" for "Is it not true that the man who finds money in following
the devil, finds it to his soul's cost?"[^1] This Colorado newspaper was
one of many that used Matthew 16:26 as a warning against the love of
money, particularly in relation to the growing wealth gap of the
nineteenth century. The verse, "What shall it profit a man if he shall
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" places the value of a soul
above all worldly possessions and in jeopardy of losing the soul to greed.

The work of capitalists was viewed by many to act in direct opposition
to proper Christianity which threatened national morality. In an entry
addressed to the editor of *The Camden Journal*, the operation of
railroads on the Christian Sabbath is presented as evidence of corporate
greed and capitalistic abandonment of religion. The author claimed such
availability encouraged vice and questioned "If all men neglected the
observance of the Sabbath, how soon would the whole social fabric fall"
and abandon souls to "the theory of Atheism."[^2] This extreme of loving
money was considered the "sin of the day"[^3] that possessed men to
abandon their roles as fathers and fall short of achieving manhood for
"this madness for money is the strongest and lowest of the
passions."[^4]

Capitalists in particular were under attack; as the United States
underwent processes of industrialization and urbanization, concerns
arose about the treatment of laborers and the wealth accumulation of
businessmen. In 1840 author A.H.H. assured readers of the *Vermont
Telegraph* that "evil lies in the *love* of money, not in the
*possession* of it" for "the more wealth we have the greater is our
*ability* to be useful."[^5] Yet there are assuredly, according to
A.H.H., improper and unlawful ways of obtaining money that oppress the
poor and denote the businessman a "fool." In 1849 Uriah H. Judan
responded in the *Daily National Whig* to what he considered the failing
of Christians to uplift their "fellow-creatures" and prioritize their
souls. Admonishing Capitalists in his article, Judan accuses these men
of being extortioners and asks, "Did you never, from purely *selfish*
motives -- from the fear of honorable competition -- endeavor to crush
the industrious poor man, in order that you might obtain his portion of
the public patronage?"[^6]

In other respects, Matthew 16:26 was applied to the evaluation of the
nation's soul and its potential demise. By the 1850s the verse was
quoted in discussions of disunion and the national debate over slavery,
primarily by Southerners. In response to a recent disunion convention
and "odious" Southern Confederacy convention, an Iowan contributor to
the *Burlington Hawk-eye* expressed delight that Tennessee and Louisiana
legislators did not subscribe to the ideas of the "Southern Traitors to
the Constitution," equating their loyalty to the Union with charity to
the church.[^7] He even modifies Matthew 16:26 to read, "What shall it
profit the South if it should gain all it anticipates and lose its part
in the Union?"[^8] For the Iowan, the value of inclusion in the union
was placed higher than individual states' desires.

Maryland, on the other hand, published a letter addressed to John C.
Calhoun and authored by "A NORTHERN MAN WITH SOUTHERN CITIZENSHIP" that
questioned Northern accusations of southern greed with Matthew 16:26.
Regarding religion as "the antecedent to our government," this author
accuses Northern governments of believing God to be against slavery but
continuing to profit economically from enslaved labor.[^9] How could the
North continue to profit from slavery and promote their religious
interpretation against the institution? He asserted that his enslavement
practices keep the commandments and therefore attempts to end slavery
doubled as attacks on his free exercise of religion. He claimed the
Wilmot Proviso in particular to be the federal government's violation of
the first amendment, and democracy in general, as an attempt to
implement the northern "particular church as the national religion,
after the manner of the nations of Europe."[^10] He closes with
encouragement to the South "to get religiously devout about the Wilmot
proviso" in a fight for the nation's soul.

When it came to war itself, the extreme increase in death caused people
to question their faith and a government's obligation to its
citizens.[^11] One Missouri paper scolded both the Union and the
Confederacy in 1861 for acting against Christian teachings, particularly
in their seeming "endeavour to magnify the number of killed by each of
the other in every contest."[^12] The *Glasgow Weekly Times* invoked
Matthew 16:26 in their concern over the souls lost to battlefields; the
disregard of the sixth commandment, "thou shalt not kill;" and the
resultant abundance of new orphans and widows \[because\] "Christ placed
a higher estimate on the value of a soul than many of his professed
followers in this *enlightened age of the world*."[^13]

By 1863, advice was printed to encourage soldiers to be prepared for
death, encouraging young men to think of Matthew 16:26 and work to clear
their consciences before battle. John H. Lee, a soldier in company F of
the 34^th^ North Carolina Infantry Regiment, was disturbed by the
inability to die the Good Death on a battlefield and was greatly
concerned that a lack of proper preparation would end in the loss of
souls. He encouraged soldiers to truly believe in their cause, but that
faith must "Unless you enlist and become a soldier of the Cross and
fight the battles of Jesus, you are lost!" for the fight in the name of
Christianity ranked the soul higher than worldly pursuits.[^14] ? The
following year, the funerary sermon for Lieutenant Williamson, a young
man of twenty-two who fought in the "the Slave Holder's Rebellion,"
quoted the verse in relation to the young man's motives -- "I can
conceive, my friends, of no nobler sacrifice than this; of no more
honorable death than this; to die nobly in defense of country."[^15]

Post-war years caused Southerners to evaluate the value of their souls
and citizenship in light of what the federal government required of
states to rejoin the Union. In the lead up to the first presidential
election of Reconstruction, the *Memphis Daily Appeal* published an
article voicing Southern concerns over Radical Republican policies, a
primary fear of which was a reversal of the racial hierarchy supposedly
to be accomplished by providing freedmen the ability to deny white male
Southerners the right to vote. The author appealed to the readership by
citing Matthew 16:26 and encouraging white men to "Organize, work, be
men, restore the old heroic days, or go to the devil."[^16]

By the century's close the verse was once again enacted against greed,
but the public became more concerned with the combination of money *and*
power. Considered by one man to be "the greatest question every
propounded by human lips,"[^17] Matthew 16:26 served as the topic of
several sermons throughout the century. The Rev. Mr. Butler of St.
Paul's Lutheran Church in Washington, D.C. preached in 1867 about the
shams of the world that led men astray, the primacy of which was gold.
With little intrinsic value Butler asserted that "the religion of the
Bible secures what gold cannot purchase" -- a warning to those who place
a high value on obtaining wealth.[^18]

As big business came to dominate the economy, warnings were placed
against corporations because they "count only the *souls* of the men in
the power which gives direction to their affairs."[^19] Yet sermons and
articles also began to be more concerned with how the money was *used*
rather than how it was *obtained*. They still referenced Matthew 16:26
to ensure focus on one's soul was of top priority, but as "C." insisted
in the Sunday School column of *The Andrew County Republican*, "it does
not matter how much we make, if we only make good use of it."[^20]
Therein lies the true way to evaluate a souls' worth, determined by the
individual's actions rather than their wealth.

Men were to always remain on guard to ensure money acted as a servant
rather than a master.[^21] When it came to enacting proper manhood, Rev.
C. W. Biddle of Lynn, Massachusetts seemed to contradict the verse when
he told his Universalist church in 1870 that "it was not wrong to gain
the world."[^22] He insisted that one did not need to renounce wealth to
be a Christian for that was a "monkish piety;" rather, proper "manhood
consists in a mastery of the outward and material" and men should "gain
the world for use, beauty and comfort."[^23] It's in the improper
acquisition and use of money that renders an individual to lost both his
manliness and his soul.

The extreme wealth gap of the 1890s caused much of the nation to
publicly criticize and attempt to subvert wealthy culture and
action.[^24] Industrialist Robber Barons were excoriated in newspapers
with Matthew 16:26 as the basis of illuminating their faults; in 1893
*The Progressive Farmer* stated, "It doesn't profit a man to gain the
whole world and lose his own soul, neither does it profit the country to
let a few millionaires gain the property while the balance of mankind
are fighting each other over imaginary issues."[^25] Power, like money,
could be both improperly gained and used which would ultimately
sacrifice a soul -- both the individual's and the nation's if the
government allowed for such wealth and power to be wielded by so few.
When questioning the tie between extreme wealth and soul value, Rev.
Thomas Dixon, Jr. of Cape Charles, Virginia simply asked about the
well-known railroad magnate, "Was Jay Gould's life worth living?"[^26]

{{% fig-full src="what-profit.png" caption="Cartoon reprint paired with an article clarifying that the Governor's supporters are \"hardy men of toil who have been robbed by the railroad interests long enough.\" This clarification was intended to boost the governor's reputation. *Evening Times-Republican* (Marshalltown, Iowa), [6 April 1906](https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn85049554/1906-04-06/ed-1/seq-4/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul)." %}}

At the turn of the twentieth century the *Los Angeles Herald* condemned
commercialism and business which they believed separated men from God;
the love of money dominated the nation and corrupted citizens with
commercial greed.[^27] As Rev. Frank S. Rowland preached to his
Methodist church in 1913, "The latest way of spelling America is with
the dollar sign."[^28] And the best way to counteract this "money-mad"
culture, according to Rowland, was to revisit Matthew 16:26 and
contemplate the value of one's soul.


[^1]: *The Rocky Ford Enterprise* (Rocky Ford, CO), 6 February 1896.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn90051265/1896-02-06/ed-1/seq-3/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^2]: *The Camden Journal* (Camden, SC), 9 May 1849.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn85042796/1849-05-09/ed-1/seq-2/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^3]: *The Green-Mountain Freeman* (Montpelier, VT), 26 June 1851.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84023209/1851-06-26/ed-1/seq-1/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^4]: *The Semi-Weekly Standard* (Raleigh, NC), 28 January 1854.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83045450/1854-01-28/ed-1/seq-2/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^5]: *The Vermont Telegraph* (Brandon, VT), 14 October 1840.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83025661/1840-10-14/ed-1/seq-1/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^6]: *The Daily National Whig* (Washington, D.C.), 18 May 1849.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn82014405/1849-05-18/ed-1/seq-2/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^7]: *Burlington Hawk-eye* (Burlington, Iowa), 21 March 1850.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn82014327/1850-03-21/ed-1/seq-2/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^8]: *Burlington Hawk-eye* (Burlington, Iowa), 21 March 1850.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn82014327/1850-03-21/ed-1/seq-2/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^9]: *Port Tobacco Times, and Charles County Advertiser* (Port Tobacco,
    MD), 31 July 1850.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn89060060/1850-07-31/ed-1/seq-1/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^10]: *Port Tobacco Times, and Charles County Advertiser* (Port
    Tobacco, MD), 31 July 1850.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn89060060/1850-07-31/ed-1/seq-1/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^11]: Drew Gilpin Faust, *The Republic of Suffering: Death and the
    American Civil War* (New York, NY: Knopf, 2008).

[^12]: *Glasgow Weekly Times* (Glasgow, MO), 1 August 1861.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn86063325/1861-08-01/ed-1/seq-3/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^13]: *Glasgow Weekly Times* (Glasgow, MO), 1 August 1861
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn86063325/1861-08-01/ed-1/seq-3/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^14]: *Spirit of the Age* (Raleigh, NC), 7 December 1863.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84026561/1863-12-07/ed-1/seq-4/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^15]: *American Citizen* (Butler, Butler County, PA), 22 June 1864.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn86053370/1864-06-22/ed-1/seq-1/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^16]: *Memphis Daily Appeal* (Memphis, TN) 28 July 1868.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83045160/1868-07-28/ed-1/seq-2/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^17]: *Alexandria Gazette* (Alexandria, D.C.), 25 April 1859.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn85025007/1859-04-25/ed-1/seq-2/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^18]: *The National Republican* (Washington, D.C.), 26 August 1867.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn86053571/1867-08-26/ed-1/seq-3/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^19]: *The Patron of Husbandry* (Columbus, MS), 4 June 1881.
    https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn86090537/1881-06-04/ed-1/seq-3/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul

[^20]: *The Andrew County Republican* (Savannah, MO), 8 January 1875.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn85034076/1875-01-08/ed-1/seq-4/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^21]: *The Weekly Union Times* (Union C.H., SC), 28 May 1880.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84026918/1880-05-28/ed-2/seq-4/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^22]: *The New York Herald* (New York, NY), 20 June 1870.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83030313/1870-06-20/ed-1/seq-4/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^23]: *The New York Herald* (New York, NY) 20 June 1870.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83030313/1870-06-20/ed-1/seq-4/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^24]: Michael McGerr, *A Fierce Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the
    Progressive movement in America 1870-1920* (New York, NY: Free
    Press, 2003).

[^25]: *The Progressive Farmer* (Winston, NC), 30 May 1893.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn92073049/1893-05-30/ed-1/seq-2/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^26]: *Yorkville Enquirer* (Yorkville, SC) 2 August 1893.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn84026925/1893-08-02/ed-1/seq-1/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^27]: *Los Angeles Herald* (Los Angeles, CA), 1 July 1907.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn85042462/1907-07-07/ed-1/seq-24/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>

[^28]: *The Detroit Times* (Detroit, MI), 6 January 1913.
    <https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83016689/1913-01-06/ed-1/seq-3/#words=man+profited+shall+gain+whole+world+lose+soul+shall+man+give+exchange+soul>
